---
title: Final Project
---

# Final Project: Calculator

Welcome to the last class! For this one we're going to be doing a small project, making a little calculator. I've prepared a template to fill in, though of course you don't have to use it. Before we do, let's recall the most important lessons we've learned for this project.

## Table of Contents

## Review

### Variables and Data Types

You can create variables using `const` (for ones that don't change) or `let` (for ones that do). Like so:

```js
const x = 1;
let y = 2;
x = 2; // Error: Can't reassign constant variable
y = 1;
```

There's many different types of data you can put into variables:

```js
const a = 1; // number
const b = true; // boolean
const c = "hi!"; // string
```

Keep in mind that strings are only ever in quotes (`""`). If something isn't in quotes, it's generally interpreted as a variable.

```js
const a = b; // Error: b is not defined
```

### Operators

There's three types of operators to remember:

#### Math

Math operators do math, which makes them rather important for a calculator:

- `+` - Add (or convert to a number, if there's nothing before it)
- `-` - Subtract (or negate a number, if there's nothing before it)
- `*` - Multiply
- `/` - Divide

#### Logic

Logic operators operate on booleans and make logical operations:

- `&&` - AND, if both are true
- `||` - OR, if one is true
- `!` - NOT, flips `true` to `false` and vice-versa

#### Comparison

Comparison operators compare two values:

- `===` - Equals
- `!==` - Not equals

### Switch Statements

Switch statements take several cases, and then run the one that matches, or the `default` one.

```js
const day = 2;

switch (day) {
  case 1:
    console.log("Monday!");
    break;
  case 2: // 2 === 2, so this part runs
    console.log("Tuesday!");
    break;
  case 3:
    console.log("Wednesday!");
    break;
  case 4:
    console.log("Thursday!");
    break;
  case 5:
    console.log("Friday!");
    break;
  case 6:
    console.log("Saturday!");
    break;
  case 7:
    console.log("Sunday!");
    break;
}
// Tuesday!
```

Recall the exercise from [Lesson 6](/6.html), which will be very useful.

### Arrays

Arrays are lists of different _elements_, or _items_. They are formed and represented by `[]`.

### Loops

The most important type of loop to remember is the for..of loop, especially on strings. This will go through the string character by character.

```js
const string = "hello, world!";

for (const character of string) {
  console.log(character);
}
// h
// e
// l
// l
// o
// ,
//
// w
// o
// r
// l
// d
// !
```

Also recall that you can use `break` to stop looping and `continue` to skip the rest of the loop and do another iteration.

### Built-In Methods

While we didn't get a chance to cover these in depth, these methods are a great way to interact with data. We actually have already seen a few:

- `console.log`, which prints something
- `"string".startsWith`, which checks if a string starts with some sequence

However, there's a few more we will need, for the more advanced project:

- `"string".split`, splits a string into array based on some separator

```js
const string = "a very long sentence";
const array = string.split(" ");
console.log(array); // ["a", "very", "long", "sentence"]
```

- `"string".trim`, which removes any spaces at the beginning or end

```js
const string = "       hi       ";
console.log(string.trim()); // hi
```

- `Number.isNaN`, which checks if something is NaN (not a number)

```js
const x = "a";
const y = "1";
console.log(Number.isNaN(+x)); // true
console.log(Number.isNaN(+y)); // false
```

## Project

After the review, here's the project: Make a calcualtor. Specifically, you type in an expression, like `2 * 3 + 4` and it gives the answer. There's going to be a few levels, based on how comfortable with programming you are.

### Level 1

The most basic is to assume that all numbers are single digits, and to also ignore order of operations. This basically comes down to looping through the string and keeping track of the current value, and doing math on it with a switch.

### Level 2

This one adds support for longer numbers, by doing a split by spaces and then iterating through that.

### Level 3

This one follows the order of operations instead of going left to right. Don't worry, I don't expect you to do this one.

## Templates

I've prepared templates with some basic instructions on stucture, though of course you don't have to follow them.

### Level 1

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-final-level-1?v=1

### Level 2

While there is a template, it may be easier to simply adapt your Level 1 answer, simply by adding a `.split` and switching the space check for a `.trim`.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-final-level-2?v=1

### Level 3

This is actually a final answer, since I don't expect you to figure out how to do this. However, feel free to try to understand how it works, and mess around with it.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-final-level-3?v=1

## Solutions

### Level 1

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-final-level-1-solution?v=1

### Level 2

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-final-level-2-solution?v=1
