---
title: Syntax
---

# Lesson 1: Syntax

The syntax of a language describes how it is written. For English, this describes how you arrange words to create valid sentences. For example, you need a noun and a verb. In JavaScript, syntax describes what symbols and words in what order are valid and which are not.

## Table of contents

## Syntax of JavaScript

### Statements

At it's basic level, a JavaScript program is a series of statements. Statements are generally followed by a semicolon and/or newline. Here's some examples of statements:

```js
const x = 1;
let y;

if (condition || condition2) { }

while (condition) { }

for (let item of list) { }
```

We will study each of these statements in the coming weeks.

### Expressions

Often statements will include expressions. Expressions are the main building block of programs, and come up a lot. Here are some examples of expressions:

```js
y = x;

condition

condition || condition2

x + 1

console.log(y)
```

Expressions are often nested. For example, both `condition` and `condition2` are expressions, and so is `condition || condition2`. This makes `||` what we call a "binary operator". We will learn more about operators in a coming lesson.

### Operators

Operators are generally one or two symbols, that are used to represent doing something to some data. The `||` is one example. Others include:

* `+` - Add, Concatenate
* `*` - Multiply
* `-` - Subtract
* `/` - Divide
* `||` - Or
* `&&` - And

### Keywords

Keywords are specifc words that mean something special to the language. Some examples can be seen above, like:

* `const`
* `let`
* `if`
* `while`
* `for`
