---
title: Data Types
---
# Lesson 3: Data Types

If you'll remember from last lesson, we put data into a variables. Stuff like `"Bob"` and `32` and `true`. But not all data is the same, right? It doesn't make sense to try to interpret `"Bob"` as a number, for example. This is what data types represent.

## Table of Contents

## Types of Types

There are two types of data types: primitives and objects. We will focus on primitives for now, and return to objects later.

### Primitive Types

There are several primitive types in JS. Let's to through them, they should be self-explanatory.

#### string

A string is a sequence of characters in quotes. Stuff like `"Bob"` or `"Hello!"` or `"M38L0P"`. Either single quotes (`'`) or double quotes (`"`), so choose whichever you like.

#### number

A number is composed of digits, and maybe a decimal point. Stuff like `1` or `75` or `8.9` or `0.0001`. Unlike in some other languages, JS does not distinguish between integers (without a decimal point) and floats (with a decimal point).

#### boolean

A boolean is simply either `true` or `false`. The name be weird, but I think the concept is very simple. It's like a light switch: on or off, true or false.

#### Others

There's a few more, but they're not really relevent right now.

* `null` - Represents a missing value.
* `undefined` - Represents a missing value.
* `BigInt` - Used for storing very big integers (whole numbers).
* `Symbol` - Used to create unique identifiers.

### Objects

There are three types of objects that are important, which we will cover later.

* `Object` - Represents a mapping of keys to values.
* `Array` - Reperesents a list of values.
* `function` - Some code that can be called, like a smaller program inside your program.

## Types and Variables

In some languages, variables are assigned a type and then can only hold data of that type. That is not the case in JS. So you can do stuff like this:

```js
let x = 1;

x = "Bob";

x = false;
```

## typeof

In order to get the type of something, you can use the `typeof` keyword:

```js
const x = 1;
const y = "Bob";
const z = false;

console.log(typeof x); // "number"
console.log(typeof y); // "string"
console.log(typeof z); // "boolean"
```

## Try It Out

Go back to the variables Repl from last lesson and try calling `typeof` on the variables there.
