---
title: Operators
---

# Lesson 4: Operators

Now that we have data in variables, we want to do stuff with them. That's what operators are for. Operators work on operands, which can be virtually anything.

```
1 + 1
^ ^ ^
| | |
| | Operand
| Operator
Operand
```

In addition, there tends to be classes of operators based on what types of data they work on. We will consider three classes here: math, logic, and comparison.

## Table of Contents

## Types of Operators

Operators are classified by the number of operands they have.

### Unary

Unary operators have 1 operand (un = one). These include `!` and certain uses of `+` and `-`.

### Binary

Binary operators have 2 operands (bi = two). These include most operators.

### Trinary

Trinary operators have 3 operands (tri = three). The main trinary operator is the ternary operator, `?:`.

## Classes of Operators

As mentioned, there are two classes of operators we will be considering: math and logic.

### Mathematical Operators

Math operators generally work on numbers. You will most likely recognize most of these. Here's the main ones we will use:

- `+` - Adds two numbers
- `-` - Subtracts two numbers
- `/` - Divides two numbers
- `*` - Multiplies two numbers
- `**` - Puts on number to the power of the other

These are all binary operators. There are also a few unary operators:

- `+` - Converts something into a number
- `-` - Negates a number

### Logical Operators

Logic operators work on booleans. Here are the main binary operators:

- `&&` - AND. Checks if both values are true
- `||` - OR. Checks if either or both values are true

And there's also a unary logical operator: `!`, NOT, which flips the value. `true` becomes `false` and `false` becomes `true`.

### Comparison Operators

Comparison operators compare things. The most obvious are `===` (equal) and `!==` (not equal). Other than those, there are the inequality operators, like `<` and `>`.

### Other

The ternary operator is special, being similar to an `if` statement, and will be covered next time in flow control.

### Try It Out

Go through each of the lines here and predict what it will output.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-operators?v=1

#### Advanced

Write your own! Try combining them, both math and logic.

## Operands

Operands can be any expression, not just a number or `true` or `false` (these are called _literals_). For example, just like in math, you can put operators together, and use parentheses to choose which part is calculated first:

```js
console.log(1 + 2 + 3); // 6
console.log((3 + 5) / 2); // 4
console.log(3 + 5 / 2); // 5.5
```

### Variables as Operands

Of course, variables also work as operands. This can be used both to split up long equations, but also for more interesting things, like we'll see later.

```js
const x = 4 + 2;
const y = 1 + 2;
console.log(x / y); // 3
```

### Try It Out

Try to make all the of the parts in parentheses into variables.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/intro-js-operands?v=1

#### Advanced

Make your own combinations of the variables you created, both in logs and in new variables.
