---
title: If Statements
---

# Lesson 5: If Statements

An `if` statement is the most basic kind of _flow control_. Flow control is about changing where your program flows. In other words, it's changing which parts of your program run, depending on the inputs. Here's a basic example:

```js
const doIt = true;

if (doIt) {
  console.log("done");
}
```

If you change `doIt` to `false`, then `"done"` will not be logged.

## Table of Contents

## Basics

An `if` statement is done by first using the keyword `if`, then an expression in parentheses, then some code in a _block_. A block is simply some code, enclosed by curly braces (`{}`). Then, the code in the block is only run if the expression is _truthy_.

```js
if (expression) {
  statement;
  statement;
}
```

## Truthiness

Almost every value is JS is truthy, meaning it will cause the block to be run. The ones that aren't are:

- `false`
- `""` (the empty a string, a string with no characters in it)
- `0`
- `NaN` (not a number)
- `null`
- `undefined`
- `-0` (Negative zero, exists due to weirdness in how computers store numbers)
- `0n` (zero, but as a `BigInt`)
- `document.all` (Really old way to interact with HTML)

## else

In addition to the `if` part, you can also supply an `else`, which will run if the expression is _falsy_ (falsy is the opposite of truthy).

```js
if (expression) {
  statement;
  statement;
} else {
  statement;
  statement;
}
```

You can also chain `if` and `else` make `else if`:

```js
if (expression) {
  statement;
} else if (expression) {
  statement;
} else {
  statement;
}
```

## Try it out

The majority of the code is just setup to read input. Look at the parts between `// START` and `// END`. Then try running it and see if it does what you expect. Then try modifying it. Remember the operators from last lesson, especially the logical and comparison ones.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-if#index.js
