---
title: Arrays
---

# Lesson 7: Arrays

An _array_ in JS is a list of values. They are represented by square brackets: `[]`. The values in the array go inside the brackets, separated by commas. For example:

```js
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

## Table of Contents

## Arrays and Variables

Just like strings and numbers, arrays be be stored in variables.

```js
const students = ["Amy", "Alex", "James"];
```

## Creating Arrays

There's a few different ways to create an array. For now, let's focus on _array literals_. An array literal is the easiest way to create an array. It's what both the above examples use. It involves using `[]` and putting values inside with commas.

```js
[1, 2, 3, 4];
[("Hi", "Hello", "Hey")];
```

## Using Arrays

Now, having that data sitting there isn't much good if we can't use it, right? There's a few ways to use arrays: get an item, set an item, and get the length.

### Get Item

The main way to use an array is to access one of it's _items_. This is done with the _index_, which just means the number of the item from the left. For example:

```js
const students = ["Amy", "Brad", "Carol", "David"];
//                 ^      ^       ^        ^
//                 |      |       |        |
//                 0      1       2        3
```

The synatx is `array[index]`, with the index in brackets. So, if I wanted to get `"Brad"` from that array, I'd do:

```js
const brad = students[1];
console.log(brad); // Brad
```

You don't have to provide just a number literal, you can also provide a variable that has a value that is a number. For example:

```js
let index = 1;
console.log(students[index]); // Brad
index += 1; // Plus Equals operator, same as index = index + 1;
console.log(students[index]); // Carol
index++; // Increment operator, same as index += 1;
console.log(students[index]); // David
```

### Set Item

In order to set an item, it's very similar to setting a variable. In the same way you get an item with `array[index]`, you set an item with `array[index] = value`. For example:

```js
students[0] = "Alice";
console.log(students); // Alice, Brad, Carol, David
```

Just like with getting, you can also use a variable as the index.

### Get length

Getting the length of an array is simply done with `array.length`. For example:

```js
console.log(array.length); // 4
```

## Try It Yourself

There's a `students` array here. Fill it in with at least 5 of your classmates and/or friends, then add some more `console.log`s with the new items. Currently it will only print the first three.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-array?v=1
