---
title: Loops
---

# Lesson 8: Loops

Loops are another kind of flow control. Instead of running or not running code based on conditions, loops instead run code multiple times, based on conditions. There are two kinds of loops we will look at: `for` loops, and `while` loops.

## Table of Contents

## While Loops

While loops are the simplest kinds of loops. They run the code given _while_ the condition given is `true`.

### Structure

The structue of a `while` loop is quite like an `if` statement: Keyword, condition in paratheses, then code in braces. Like so:

```js
while (condition) {
  statement;
  statement;
}
```

### Usage

The main way to use `while` loops is to use a variable in the condition, then change it as the loops runs. For example:

```js
let a = true;
let b = true;
let x = 0;
let y = 0;
while (a && b) {
  x = y + 1;
  y = x + 1;
  a = x < 10;
  b = y < 20;
  console.log(a, b, x, y);
}
```

What do you think this code will output?

### Variations

The main variation on a `while` loop is a `do..while` loop. That looks like this:

```js
do {
  statement;
  statement;
} while (condition);
```

It acts basically the same as a `while` loop, with one difference: If `condition` is falsy to start with, a `while` loop won't do anything, but a `do..while` loop will run once. More specifically, `while` checks the condition before each run, and a `do..while` checks at the end of each run.

## For Loops

The other main type of loop is a `for` loop. These work a little differently. Let's start with why we might want them.

### Why

Suppose you wanted to run a given piece of code X number of times. With just a while loop, you'd do something like this:

```js
let i = 0;
while (i < X) {
  code;
  i++;
}
```

While this code is fine, the relevant bits for how it's looping are spread in multiple places. Imagine if `code;` was 50 lines instead of 1. In addition, this is a very common situation, so it'd be nice to have a clearer and shorter way to express that.

### Structure

For loops look like While loops, but instead of the `condition`, they're a bit more complicated. Let's take a look:

```js
for (init; condition; each) {
  statement;
  statement;
}
```

This will do the following:

1. Run `init`.
2. Check `condition`. If falsy, exit.
3. Run `statement`s.
4. Run `each`.
5. Go to 2.

So it will continue looping, running `each` each loop, as long as `condition` is truthy.

### Usage

The main use of `for` loops is to execute some code a given number of times. For example, this code is equilvent to the code from [Why](#why):

```js
for (let i = 0; i < X; i++) {
  code;
}
```

As you can see, this is both clearer and shorter.

### Variations

There are main variations of `for` loops: `for..of` and `for..in`.

#### For Of Loops

For Of loops slightly different from `for` or `while` loops, in that instead of a condition they are given something to loop _through_. This is mainly either an array or a string. This difference also means that the structure is slightly different. For Of loops look like this:

```js
for (const item of thing) {
  statement;
  statement;
}
```

This will go through all the items in `thing`, assigning each one to `item`, then running the `statement`s. For example:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let sum = 0;
for (const num of array) {
  sum += num;
}
console.log(sum); // 15 = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
```

#### For In Loops

For In loops are similar to `for..of` loops, except instead of going through items in an array or string, they go trough _properties_ in _objects_. Unfortunately I don't think we will have time to cover objects in this class.

## Loop Control

Beyond the conditions and inputs in loops, we also have two keywords that can help us control how loops behave. These are `break` and `continue`.

### Usage

These two keywords are not used like the keywords we've seen so far. Instead, they are simply statements all on their own. Like so:

```js
break;
continue;
```

However, they will only work inside a loop. When used there, they act on the innermost loop, which is important when nesting them.

### break

The `break` keyword will instantly end the loop's execution, regardless of the condition. For example:

```js
let i = 0;
while (i < 100) {
  i += 10;
  if (i === 50) {
    break;
  }
}
console.log(i); // 50
```

Even though the `while` loop wouldn't end until `i` reaches `100`, the `break` ends it as soon as `i` is `50`.

### continue

The `continue` keyword, in contrast, will instantly start a new cycle of the loop, ignoring the rest of the code. For example:

```js
for (let i = 0; i < 100; i += 10) {
  if (i < 50) {
    continue;
  }
  console.log(i);
}
// 50
// 60
// 70
// 80
// 90
```

This since the `console.log(i)` is after the `continue`, when that `if` statement runs, the `console.log` is skipped.

## Loops and Arrays

One thing that is very useful with arrays is running some code for each element in them. Loops are the best way to do this. You can do it with any type of loop, but I recommend either `for` or `for..of`, depending on what you need. If you need to modify them, use `for`, otherwise, use `for..of`. For example, both of these will log all the items in `array`:

```js
for (let i = 0; i < array.legnth; i++) {
  console.log(array[i]);
}
```

```js
for (const item of array) {
  console.log(item);
}
```

The second one is much simpler, right? But it has no way to assign to the item of `array`.

## Try it Yourself

There's a `numbers` array here. Your goal is to first use a `for` loop to increment each item by 10, then use a `for..of` loop to print all the items in it.

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-loops-basic#index.js

### Advanced

If you want to look at and try something more involved, take a look at this:

https://replit.com/@jbennett/js-intro-loops-adv?v=1

This code will find all the digits in your input, and count them into the `numbers` array. Then, if you input `check`, it will print the `numbers` array.

Your goal with this one is to make add a `reset` command, where if you type that in then all the items in the `numbers` array are set to 0. (Hint: The detection is the same as the `check` command.)
